Hello, hello, hello, and welcome
to episode 31 of English Learning for Curious
Minds by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge and today we are going to be
talking about how Google works.
Is the biggest search engine in the world with
80,000 searches per second.
And for most humans, it's how we find information.
But have you ever actually wondered how it works?
What happens when you press search?
And how is it such a money making machine, valued
at almost a trillion dollars?
That's what we'll be talking about in today's
podcast.
Before we get right into it, though, I have two
little public service announcements.
Firstly, thank you to everyone who wrote in with
feedback on the podcast.
I want to build this into the best, most
interesting way for you to improve your English
while learning fascinating things about the world
and the feedback has been really, really
interesting.
I'm always on the hunt for more feedback, so if
there are things that you like, things you don't
like, please don't hesitate to get in touch.
Just email hi 'hi' at Leonardoenglish.com.
Secondly, for those of you listening to this
podcast on Spotify, iVoox Apple Podcasts or
wherever you might be listening, you can get a
copy of the transcript and key vocabulary for the
podcast over on the website, which is
Leonardoenglish.com.
We also just launched two new ways to become a
member, so you can now choose to join by week, by
month or even by year.
So check that out.
That's over at leonardoenglish.com/subscribe.
Okay then, Google.
Now this isn't going to be some very technical
analysis or some marketing type-podcast where I
tell you how you can be number one in the search
rankings.
Instead, today we are going to talk about what
actually happens when you make a Google search.
What happens in the background.
Why Google decides to show you certain things
instead of others, and we'll talk about the
money-making machine that is Google Ads.
As you may know, the name of the parent company,
the company that owns Google, is actually
Alphabet.
It does everything from self-driving cars to
smart-home sensors to health.
That's far too much to cover in detail in today's
podcast, so we'll be focusing on Google Search,
the search engine, that classic, original Google.
So I think Google probably needs no introduction.
It's the biggest search engine in the world, the
most popular website in the world, and it was
visited 62 billion times last year.
And I don't need to tell you that it's obviously a
very effective search engine.
It does one thing incredibly well.
It organises all the information on the internet
and makes that information easy for people to
find.
And again, this won't be news for you, when you
search Google, when you ask Google for something,
the results are normally pretty good.
You get the information you're looking for,
whether that was 'hotel in Madrid' or 'how old is
the queen' or 'how to learn English with
podcasts'.
Google gives you a selection of results that
answer your question and all in a matter of
seconds, right?
All of this information is available at the tip of
your fingertips.
But if we take a step back, it's quite interesting
to think about how Google actually does this.
You could say, well, it's all on the internet and
Google just searches the internet and shows you
stuff.
At a very basic level, there is some truth to
that, but it's a lot more complicated.
Firstly, let's take the term 'the internet'.
There are over a billion unique websites, and it's
estimated that there could be 60 trillion pages.
Obviously a load of these are junk, they're
rubbish, but a lot of them do, of course, contain
useful information, the kind of information that
someone might want.
But there's no central system that organises
everything, there's not an organisation or a
central database for the internet.
Google can't just query the internet every time
you make a search.
So what Google does is it makes its own copy of
the internet, of webpages on the internet.
It does this by sending what it calls crawlers all
over the internet, and they gather information
about websites, about webpages, and they bring it
back to Google.
This is sometimes known as Google Spider.
And obviously it's not a real spider, that would
be ridiculous.
It is a computer program, an algorithm or series
of algorithms that are constantly scanning
websites and adding information to Google's copy
of the internet.
But how does it actually know where to look for
information?
As we now know, there isn't a central database of
websites, and of course, new web pages and
websites are being created every millisecond.
So what Google does is it follows the links on
websites.
It basically goes from one link to another,
following links from page to page to page, going
on this huge internet journey, discovering new
websites, discovering new web pages, discovering
dead or broken links and adding these all to
Google's gigantic copy of the internet, its index
of the internet.
Okay, so far so good, perhaps.
But now that Google has this copy of the internet,
how does it decide what to show you as a search
result?
Why might you and I see completely different
things, even if we type in exactly the same thing.
And how does Google decide what order things are
shown?
Again, it's complicated, but Google's aim is to
answer your question, answer your query in the
quickest, most efficient way possible.
How does it actually do this?
Well, the way that Google thinks about this can be
summarised with three things, really.
Firstly, something called relevance.
It tries to show you relevant results to the
question you've asked.
If you search for 'adopt a dog', you don't want to
see websites about dog food or about adopting a
cat.
You want to see information about adopting a dog.
Obvious you might think, but it's actually quite
difficult to get right.
The adopt a dog example is a bit more
straightforward, but let's take a slightly more
complicated one.
Let's say you search for the phrase "London
Paris".
Are you looking for train tickets or flights?
Are you looking for the hotel called 'London' in
Paris?
Or maybe you're looking for an obscure artist
called London Paris.
You could mean a lot of different things and the
results you see depend on who you are, where you
are when you're searching, and a load of different
other factors.
The more Google knows about you, the better it can
try and guess what you might really be searching
for, and therefore the better or more relevant
search results it can show you.
This is why Google wants to collect as much data
as possible about you in order to show you more
targeted search results, and of course, more
targeted adverts.
And the relevance of a search result also depends
on the content of the webpage, the words on the
website.
The closer the words on the website are to the
words that you're searching, in general, the more
relevant Google will think that page is for you.
Back when Google started, over 20 years ago now,
people use to fill websites up with supposedly
relevant words just to trick Google into putting
them higher up in the search rankings.
But now at least Google has got a lot smarter and
lots of these tricks don't work anymore.
Our second factor that Google takes into
consideration when deciding what results to show
you is something that Google calls quality.
Now, what does this actually mean?
Well, we know that quality is a scale of how good
something is.
But what does good mean in this context?
Well, by good quality, Google means webpages,
websites that are trustworthy, ones that will
provide accurate information.
And going back to our example of searching for
'London Paris Google will show you results from
websites like eurostar.com or tripadvisor.com,
websites that you probably know and trust.
All good so far.
But Google isn't a person, how does it know if a
website is good quality or not?
Again, this is simplifying it, but the main way in
which it does this is through the other websites
that link to it.
If a website has links from other websites that
are also considered good quality or good
authority, then Google will be more likely to
consider that website to be a good quality one.
Likewise, if a website doesn't have any links from
good quality websites or it has lots of links from
websites that Google considers spam or low
quality, well then Google is going to decide that
this website isn't very high quality.
And the final factor of are three important
factors is user experience.
By this we mean is the website easy for people to
use and do people seem to like using it?
Does it load quickly?
Does it not have those annoying popups that ask
you to put in your email address or to send you
notifications?
Do people tend to continue to stay on it when they
arrive or do they immediately leave?
Our friend, the Google Spider, can help with this
as not only does it make copies of every website
out there, but it also tries to figure out how
easy a website is to use.
So we have these three factors, relevance,
quality, and user experience.
With every single search term, Google takes these
things along with about 200 others into
consideration and shows you relevant search terms
in milliseconds.
Pretty cool, huh?
And all for free, right?
You don't pay Google anything for this service.
But note the use of the pronoun you.
You don't pay Google anything.
Advertisers, of course, do, and they pay Google
huge amounts of money.
Google is just incredibly good at making money.
In fact, in the last quarter of 2019, the last
three months of 2019, it made almost $6,000 every
second.
So if we're about 10 minutes into the podcast,
let's say, Google has probably made about $4
million in the time that you've been listening.
And one big thing that we haven't talked about yet
in any detail is ads, adverts.
Again, another pretty complicated subject, but
let's try and keep it as simple as possible.
Google is a huge corporation and its objective is
to make as much money as possible.
It does this through showing adverts and like any
advert-supported media platform, it has the
tradeoff, the consideration, of wanting as many
people as possible to click on their ads without
people getting too annoyed about there being too
many ads.
Obviously it would be super annoying if it was
just ads, but if there were no ads at all, Google
wouldn't make any money.
So it's a delicate balance to get right, and as
you probably have noticed over the past 10 years
or so, Google has gradually been showing more ads
and the ads that it has been showing have become
less and less distinctive from the normal search
results.
You don't have to be a genius to figure out what's
going on here.
Google is obviously hoping that the changes it's
made will mean that more people click on ads.
Google Ads is obviously a huge business, and
agencies that help other companies with Google Ads
is also a multibillion dollar industry.
So I'm going to simplify things a little bit with
the explanation of how it works.
But the principles are pretty simple and similar
in some respects to how Google chooses to order,
to rank, its normal search results.
So how does Google Ads work?
Advertisers decide that they want their adverts to
be shown for certain searches, then every time
that there is a search, Google shows adverts based
on things like how relevant that ad is for the
search, what is the experience on the website that
the advertiser has, but also, and here's where it
gets interesting, how much money that advertiser
is willing to pay.
And as it's an auction, the more an advertiser
offers to pay, the more another advertiser needs
to offer to pay to compete with them.
For some searches, because the amount of money
that the advertiser is likely to make from someone
clicking on their advert is quite small, they
would bid, they would offer, a relatively small
amount of money.
For example, someone searching for 'cheap bread',
an advertiser isn't likely to make much money from
that sale.
And for some searches there aren't any ads at all,
no adverts at all, because those searches are from
people looking for information.
For example, someone's searching, how old is the
queen?
That's obviously a search for information, it
doesn't indicate that that person wants to buy
something.
The answer is 93 by the way.
But if someone searches for "buy expensive diamond
ring now", well, companies that sell expensive
diamond rings would probably be interested in
showing adverts to that person and would probably
offer to pay lots of money to appear in that
search.
So that person would see adverts from advertisers
selling diamond rings, and if that person clicks
on one of the adverts, then the advertiser would
have to pay Google.
In fact, the cost that advertisers pay for each
click can be very large.
The most expensive search term last year was "best
mesothelioma lawyer" for which the average amount
paid for each click was $935, $935 just for a
click.
I guess you probably don't know what mesothelioma
is.
I didn't either, and I'm sure I'm pronouncing it
in a terrible way.
It's a kind of disease caused by exposure to
asbestos.
So the advertisers who are bidding on this
particular search are law firms who are hoping
that each click is going to bring them more than a
thousand dollars in new business on average.
Mad, right?
And so if you are wondering how Google manages to
make quite so much money, well that's how.
There are a load of things that we haven't covered
in here that I know are pretty interesting, such
as how Google uses our data, the implications of
this and all of the other stuff that Google does.
So I hope you'll excuse me for not covering that.
I just want to share with you a few more strange
facts about Google that I guess you probably
didn't know.
Firstly, about 20% of queries of searches that are
asked every day have never been asked before.
So Google is constantly having to figure out
answers to new questions.
Secondly, every search has to travel on average
1,500 miles to a data centre and back to return
the answer to the person who searched for it.
So that question you've just asked, it has
traveled 3000 miles, it's done a round trip of
3000 miles and returned to you in under a second.
And finally, a single Google search uses a
thousand computers in 0.2 seconds to find an
answer.
Okay, I hope that this has been an interesting
introduction to how Google works.
It's a fascinating company and we have only just
scratched the surface today.
As always, if you have questions, feedback,
thoughts, or more, I'd love to hear from you.
You can get in touch on Facebook, Instagram, or of
course by email.
That's hi hi@leonardoenglish.com.
And as I said at the start of the podcast, if you
are interested in becoming a member of Leonardo
English, getting access to all of the transcripts,
key vocabulary, bonus episodes, and supporting the
podcast, then you can find out more at
leonardoenglish.com/subscribe.
We've also just launched weekly and annual
membership options, so go and check that out if
you haven't done so already.
You've been listening to English Learning for
Curious Minds by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge and I'll catch you in the next
episode.